

Babel’s use of contrast in “The Road”

Babel, Isaac. “The Road.” The Collected Stories of Isaac Babel.
		New York, London: W.W. Norton, 2002. 423-424.



	Half way down the second page of “The Road,” I stopped reading. The topic was disturbing, but it was the writing that agitated me, and I wanted to know how it did that.  After looking at what I read, I began to list what I saw there.  Babel will lay the general beside the specific, the mundane beside the weird, the gentle beside the brutal as if they were of equal weights.  The result of this, along with the simple declarative sentences, the lack of transitions, and the absence of the other bits of commentary and evaluation one often finds in fiction, creates a series of jolts for the reader.  
	The opening paragraph, for example, is a summary, part circumstantial and part sequential. In it, however, following a general action and reference to place and time, is the second sentence: “At home my mother packed underwear and dried bread for me.”  This makes me immediately worry about the narrator’s safety. 

	The second paragraph begins less factually than the first; it’s a pronouncement on the comparative cheerlessness of a Kiev train station.  Next sentence supports the first with a factual statement about the town’s defaced outskirt, but it’s general, as if seen from a far distance.  The next sentence is a surprise.  “Lice crackled on wet planks.” This is an abrupt close-up on something unpleasant, without mitigating transition, without gradual adjustments in distance. The next sentence is general again, a list of the types of people at the station, smugglers and gypsies and so forth, and they are crowded together, as would be seen from afar.  Then “Old Galician women urinated standing on the platform.”  What?  At first this seems specific, but how many of these women?  When do they urinate? Perhaps it’s a general occurrence, repeating over time? (The next paragraph suggests these women could have been urinating al fresco off and on over the course of three days.) Yet the next sentence--the final of the paragraph—turns to the sky, and the sky is nearly personified. It “was furrowed with clouds full of rain and gloom,” as if it concurs with the narrator’s opinion about Kiev train stations.

	If the general movement of the second paragraph is from the narrator’s commentary on the Kiev train station to the sky’s comment on it, then the general movement of the third paragraph is from motion and optimism to stillness and dread. First the train gains speed, and with personification, the train sings “a powerful song.” Here the narrator is inside the train with the others, filled with joy.  Then the narrator, suddenly removed from the train and moment, almost stepping outside the story because he is commenting from the future. “Fast travel filled people with joy in 1918.”  When the narrator returns to inside of the train, it is night the train jolts to a stop.
	
	Before we come to the brutality that follows, Babel sets us up for it with quick characterization of the married couple seated near the narrator. They (a schoolmaster and his wife) had been whispering to each other about new structured methods in teaching, then dozed off, their hands still clasped in sleep. When the telegrapher shoots the schoolmaster in face, it is a shock.  When a muzhik slices off the schoolmaster’s genitals and stuffs them into his wife’s mouth, the contrast is too great, too quick.  
	“The woman’s soft throat swelled.”  The contrast between the woman soft throat and the brutality, the sexual imagery of her throat jammed against the horror and nonsense of what is happening, and the echo of what had just been—the drowsy fondness, the comfort of the married couple—in the sudden nightmare. This stands on its own, without lurid depiction of gore or blood, or interpretation.  “She remained silent,” is the next sentence, we too remain silent, in shock. Without transition, we are outside the train: “The train was standing on the steppes.” Jews are being shot.  Then another contrast with the shooting is the beautiful description, something noticed while in a dreamy state of shock: “Smoke rose from the forests lilac wall.”  This is what the narrator sees while the muzhik’s “wooden fingers crept stiffly over my body.” All of this is in one short paragraph, and it stopped me.  I had the feeling these were true events.  How?  	There is no commentary, no interpretation or digestion of the events. How could there be?  The story (and the reader with it) has moved swiftly from silliness and hope for life to degrading darkness. The writing itself registers, its seems, that trauma, and in this way conveys it without distraction.  Short, naked sentences leave plenty of room in which the reader is allowed to grope, stunned.
	

